Static and dynamic typing can be combined in a very simple and
intuitive way by extending the work of Scott~\cite{Scott:1980} on
categorical models of the untyped $\lambda$-calculus.  First, add a
new type $<<?>>$ read ``the type of untyped programs'' -- also
sometimes called the unknown type -- and then add four new programs
$<<split>> : <<? -> (? -> ?)>>$, $ <<squash>> : <<(? -> ?) -> ?>> $,
$<<box C>> : <<C -> ?>>$, and $<<unbox C>> : <<? -> C>>$, such that,
$<<squash>>;<<squash>> = \id_{[[? -> ?]]}$ and $<<box C>>;<<unbox C>>
= \id_{[[C]]}$.  Categorically, $<<split>>$ and $<<squash>>$, and
$<<box>>$ and $<<unbox>>$ form two retracts.  The authors
\cite{Eades:2017} have shown in a previous paper that extending the
simply typed $\lambda$-calculus with these two retracts results in a
new core casting calculus, called Simply Typed Grady, for Siek and
Taha's gradual functional type system \cite{Siek:2015}.  Furthermore,
the authors show that Siek and Taha's system can be given a
categorical model in cartesian closed categories with the two
retracts.

In this paper we extend Grady with bounded quantification and lists.
We chose bounded quantification so that the bounds can be used to
control which types are castable and which should not be.  Currently,
we will not allow polymorphic types to be cast to the unknown type.  

%%% Local Variables: ***
%%% mode:latex ***
%%% TeX-master: "main.tex"  ***
%%% End: ***
